Reviewer comment 3.44 (#1188)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines-trad.md

Various frameworks, models, and methods have been proposed to tackle these issues with many countries, regions, or U.S. states devising their own distribution and administration plans [@doi:10.1126/science.abe6959; @doi:10.1038/s41598-020-78447-3; @doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.12.059; @doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-107036; @doi:10.1101/2021.01.12.21249694].
The majority of the distribution plans prioritized offering vaccines to key workers such as health care workers and those who are clinically vulnerable, such as the elderly, the immunocompromised, and individuals with comorbidities, before targeting the rest of the population, who are less likely to experience severe outcomes from COVID-19 [@url:https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccination-policy].
The availability of vaccines developed in a variety of countries using a variety of platforms is likely to work in favor of worldwide vaccine access.

> Hence why the development of Corbevax, a COVID-19 protein subunit vaccine developed by Texas Children’s Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine is an important initiaitve as it is patent free and so its manufactuing specifications can be shared globally. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The initiative by Texas Children’s Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine to develop Corbevax, a patent-free COVID-19 protein subunit vaccine, is an important step towards vaccine equity because the manufacturing specifications can be shared globally.
```
I tried to streamline this a little

> Corbevax can be produced at low-cost using existing techonology that is now licensed to Biological E. Limited (BioE) for production and is approved for distribution in India and Botswana [@url:https://theconversation.com/corbevax-a-new-patent-free-covid-19-vaccine-could-be-a-pandemic-game-changer-globally-174672; @url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/54/].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Corbevax can be produced at low cost using existing techonology and is now licensed to Biological E. Limited (BioE), an Indian company specializing in low-cost vaccine production [@url:https://theconversation.com/corbevax-a-new-patent-free-covid-19-vaccine-could-be-a-pandemic-game-changer-globally-174672].
The vaccine has been approved for distribution in India and Botswana [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/54].
```

Reviewer: We may end up moving some of this text since reviewer 1 wanted us to add more vaccines, and this seems like a good one to add! But works great here now.

Author: Sounds good

Logistical challenges and geographical barriers also dictate the availability of certain vaccines. 

> Many countries have had poor availability of ultra low temperature freezers leading to challenges of distribution for vaccines requiring cold storage [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010; @doi:10.1208/s12249-021-01974-3; @url:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-03/pfizer-to-supply-african-health-care-workers-with-vaccines?leadSource=uverify%20wall]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many countries have had poor availability of ultra-low temperature freezers, leading to challenges of distribution for vaccines such as mRNA vaccines that require storage at very low temperatures [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010; @doi:10.1208/s12249-021-01974-3; @url:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-03/pfizer-to-supply-african-health-care-workers-with-vaccines]. 
```
I think some of them just require normal refrigeration and that is an improvement, right? I wasn't sure if "cold storage" was quite the right term since normal-refrigerator-able vaccines are being designed to try to work around this problem

Author: The most of the more traditional vaccines do only require normal refrigeration. I think the problem was basically the mRNA ones. Although in hotter nations, the traditional vaccines generally needed 2-8c storage, which is still a challenge in its own right when dealing with bulk amounts being transported, but otherwise fine if it is only a few doses to share.

Furthermore, ancillary supplies such as vaccine containers, diluents for frozen or lyophilized vaccines, disinfecting wipes, bandaids, needles, syringes, sharps and biological waste disposal containers are also required, which may not be readily available in geographically isolated loactions and can be bulky and expensive to ship [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010]. 

> While some of these challenges in vaccine rollout in low- and middle-income countries are being supported through COVAX, [@url:https://www.unicef.org/supply/covax-ensuring-global-equitable-access-covid-19-vaccines], many issues persist worldwide [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(22)00328-2;@doi:10.1093/cid/ciac361; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2022.2091862].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While some of these challenges in vaccine rollout in low- and middle-income countries are being addressed through COVAX [@url:https://www.unicef.org/supply/covax-ensuring-global-equitable-access-covid-19-vaccines], many issues persist worldwide [@doi:10/jqp4; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciac361; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2022.2091862].
```

> COVAX also failed to distribute its promised 2 billion vaccine doses on time due to multiple complications [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/10/covax-doses-delivered/].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
COVAX also failed to distribute its promised two billion vaccine doses on time due to multiple complications [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/10/covax-doses-delivered].
```

Another major challenge to global vaccine distribution is vaccine hesitancy, which the WHO has designated as a leading global health threat [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/spotlight/ten-threats-to-global-health-in-2019]. 

> Polling in the U.S. in January (2021) suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine in January 2021 with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021-vaccine-hesitancy; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polling in the U.S. in January 2021 suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine at that time, with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021-vaccine-hesitancy; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].
```

> A survey of 8,243 long-term healthcare workers in November 2020 (Indiana, USA) reported that only 69% of respondents would ever consider receiving an FDA-approved vaccine due to their perceived risk of side effects (70%), health concerns (34%) efficacy (20%), and religious beliefs (12%) [@doi:10.1111/jgs.17022].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A survey of 8,243 long-term healthcare workers in November 2020 (Indiana, USA) reported that only 69% of respondents would ever consider receiving an FDA-approved vaccine due to their perceived risk of side effects (70%), health concerns (34%), efficacy (20%), and religious beliefs (12%) [@doi:10.1111/jgs.17022].
```

> Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi: 10.1177/003335492211143].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143].
```

> Indeed, vaccine hesitancy has been reported as a significant barrier to vaccine distribution sin countries of North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Africa [@doi:10.1002/jmv.28156; @doi:10.1126/sciadv.abm9825; @doi:10.1186/s41256-022-00255-1; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2021.2011580; @doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052432]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indeed, vaccine hesitancy has been reported as a significant barrier to vaccine distribution in countries in North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Africa [@doi:10.1002/jmv.28156; @doi:10.1126/sciadv.abm9825; @doi:10.1186/s41256-022-00255-1; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2021.2011580; @doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052432]. 
```

> Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative polictical beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns to highlight a few [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative polictical beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns, to highlight a few [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143].
```

> Many of the concerns regarding safety and efficacy have mostly focused on the novel mRNA technologies due to their perceived speed of development and expidited clinical trial process [@doi:10.1186/s13037-021-00291-9], however, general vaccine hesistancy relating to traditional vaccine platforms existed long before the pandemic and the distribution of the novel mRNA vaccines [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.035; @doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.09.006].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of the concerns regarding safety and efficacy have focused on the novel mRNA technologies due to the perceived speed of their development and expedited clinical trial process [@doi:10.1186/s13037-021-00291-9]; however, general vaccine hesitancy relating to traditional vaccine platforms existed long before the pandemic and the distribution of the novel mRNA vaccines [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.035; @doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.09.006].
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe I should pull the data about how many Americans have actually received Novavax and add a sentence here? That was allegedly supposed to be a game changer for vaccine skeptics because it wasn't a new technology, but I definitely haven't heard anything suggesting that it has been.

Author: That's a good idea actually, I took the low hanging fruit of mRNA vaccines to address that comment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While in the United States, it was hoped that Novavax's Nuvaxovid would appeal to the vaccine hesitant [@url:https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/public-health/what-sets-apart-novavax-option-other-covid-19-vaccines; @url:https://www.galvnews.com/health/free/article_8ddebef4-1db0-579a-b0d2-852f2031d881.html], but this protein subunit vaccine has not led to the uptake hoped [@doi:10.1001/jama.2022.13661; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2022/07/15/why-new-novavax-covid-vaccine-wont-win-over-unvaccinated-americans.html]. 
```

Reviewer: ![novavax](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8975841/208579242-2230cc4a-9825-445b-aa76-548d0205c2e0.png)
Hey @RLordan, I wasn't able to get a good visualization of this data. Things are being buggy and I'm not sure if it's the dataset or the plotting package. I can probably get something like this to work if we think it would be useful, but also maybe the sentence I suggested above is enough!

Author: I think a plot like this would be useful. People respond to visuals more. Certainly, it shows that J&J and Novavax never kicked off that much once approved.

Various frameworks, models, and methods have been proposed to tackle these issues with many countries, regions, or U.S. states devising their own distribution and administration plans [@doi:10.1126/science.abe6959; @doi:10.1038/s41598-020-78447-3; @doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.12.059; @doi:10.1136/medethics-2020-107036; @doi:10.1101/2021.01.12.21249694].
The majority of the distribution plans prioritized offering vaccines to key workers such as health care workers and those who are clinically vulnerable, such as the elderly, the immunocompromised, and individuals with comorbidities, before targeting the rest of the population, who are less likely to experience severe outcomes from COVID-19 [@url:https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccination-policy].
The availability of vaccines developed in a variety of countries using a variety of platforms is likely to work in favor of worldwide vaccine access.
The initiative by Texas Children’s Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine to develop Corbevax, a patent-free COVID-19 protein subunit vaccine, is an important step towards vaccine equity because the manufacturing specifications can be shared globally.

> Corbevax can be produced at low cost using existing techonology and is now licensed to Biological E. Limited (BioE), an Indian company specializing in low-cost vaccine production [@url:https://theconversation.com/corbevax-a-new-patent-free-covid-19-vaccine-could-be-a-pandemic-game-changer-globally-174672].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Corbevax can be produced at low cost using existing technology and is now licensed to Biological E. Limited (BioE), an Indian company specializing in low-cost vaccine production [@url:https://theconversation.com/corbevax-a-new-patent-free-covid-19-vaccine-could-be-a-pandemic-game-changer-globally-174672].
```

The vaccine has been approved for distribution in India and Botswana [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/vaccines/54].

Logistical challenges and geographical barriers also dictate the availability of certain vaccines. 
Many countries have had poor availability of ultra-low temperature freezers, leading to challenges of distribution for vaccines such as mRNA vaccines that require storage at very low temperatures [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010; @doi:10.1208/s12249-021-01974-3; @url:https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-03/pfizer-to-supply-african-health-care-workers-with-vaccines]. 

> Furthermore, ancillary supplies such as vaccine containers, diluents for frozen or lyophilized vaccines, disinfecting wipes, bandaids, needles, syringes, sharps and biological waste disposal containers are also required, which may not be readily available in geographically isolated loactions and can be bulky and expensive to ship [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, ancillary supplies such as vaccine containers, diluents for frozen or lyophilized vaccines, disinfecting wipes, bandages, needles, syringes, sharps and biological waste disposal containers are also required, which may not be readily available in geographically isolated locations and can be bulky and expensive to ship [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010]. ƒ√
```

Polling in the U.S. in January 2021 suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine at that time, with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021-vaccine-hesitancy; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].
A survey of 8,243 long-term healthcare workers in November 2020 (Indiana, USA) reported that only 69% of respondents would ever consider receiving an FDA-approved vaccine due to their perceived risk of side effects (70%), health concerns (34%), efficacy (20%), and religious beliefs (12%) [@doi:10.1111/jgs.17022].
Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143].
Indeed, vaccine hesitancy has been reported as a significant barrier to vaccine distribution in countries in North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Africa [@doi:10.1002/jmv.28156; @doi:10.1126/sciadv.abm9825; @doi:10.1186/s41256-022-00255-1; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2021.2011580; @doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052432]. 

> Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative polictical beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143], to highlight a few.

Author: My spelling was atrocious this time... :D

COVAX also failed to distribute its promised two billion vaccine doses on time due to multiple complications [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/10/covax-doses-delivered].

Another major challenge to global vaccine distribution is vaccine hesitancy, which the WHO has designated as a leading global health threat [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/spotlight/ten-threats-to-global-health-in-2019]. 
Polling in the U.S. in January 2021 suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine at that time, with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021-vaccine-hesitancy; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].
A survey of 8,243 long-term healthcare workers in November 2020 (Indiana, USA) reported that only 69% of respondents would ever consider receiving an FDA-approved vaccine due to their perceived risk of side effects (70%), health concerns (34%), efficacy (20%), and religious beliefs (12%) [@doi:10.1111/jgs.17022].

> Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi:10.1177/00333549221114346].
```

Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative political beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143], to highlight a few.
Many of the concerns regarding safety and efficacy have focused on the novel mRNA technologies due to the perceived speed of their development and expedited clinical trial process [@doi:10.1186/s13037-021-00291-9]; however, general vaccine hesitancy relating to traditional vaccine platforms existed long before the pandemic and the distribution of the novel mRNA vaccines [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.09.035; @doi:10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.09.006].

> While in the United States, it was hoped that Novavax's Nuvaxovid would appeal to the vaccine hesitant [@url:https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/public-health/what-sets-apart-novavax-option-other-covid-19-vaccines; @url:https://www.galvnews.com/health/free/article_8ddebef4-1db0-579a-b0d2-852f2031d881.html], but this protein subunit vaccine has not led to the uptake hoped [@doi:10.1001/jama.2022.13661; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2022/07/15/why-new-novavax-covid-vaccine-wont-win-over-unvaccinated-americans.html]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While in the United States, it was hoped that Novavax's Nuvaxovid would appeal to the vaccine hesitant [@url:https://www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/public-health/what-sets-apart-novavax-option-other-covid-19-vaccines; @url:https://www.galvnews.com/health/free/article_8ddebef4-1db0-579a-b0d2-852f2031d881.html], but this protein subunit vaccine has not led to the uptake hoped [@doi:10.1001/jama.2022.13661; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2022/07/15/why-new-novavax-covid-vaccine-wont-win-over-unvaccinated-americans.html].
 
```

Furthermore, ancillary supplies such as vaccine containers, diluents for frozen or lyophilized vaccines, disinfecting wipes, bandages, needles, syringes, sharps and biological waste disposal containers are also required, which may not be readily available in geographically isolated locations and can be bulky and expensive to ship [@doi:10.1093/inthealth/ihab010]. ƒ√
While some of these challenges in vaccine rollout in low- and middle-income countries are being addressed through COVAX [@url:https://www.unicef.org/supply/covax-ensuring-global-equitable-access-covid-19-vaccines], many issues persist worldwide [@doi:10/jqp4; @doi:10.1093/cid/ciac361; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2022.2091862].
COVAX also failed to distribute its promised two billion vaccine doses on time due to multiple complications [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/10/covax-doses-delivered].

Another major challenge to global vaccine distribution is vaccine hesitancy, which the WHO has designated as a leading global health threat [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/spotlight/ten-threats-to-global-health-in-2019]. 

> Polling in the U.S. in January 2021 suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine at that time, with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021-vaccine-hesitancy; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polling in the U.S. in January 2021 suggested that 20% of individuals were reluctant to receive a vaccine at that time, with a further 31% expressing some hesitancy to a lesser extent [@url:https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/report/kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-january-2021; @doi:10.1056/NEJMms2101220].
```

A survey of 8,243 long-term healthcare workers in November 2020 (Indiana, USA) reported that only 69% of respondents would ever consider receiving an FDA-approved vaccine due to their perceived risk of side effects (70%), health concerns (34%), efficacy (20%), and religious beliefs (12%) [@doi:10.1111/jgs.17022].
Notably, almost a third of parents surveyed in the United States in March 2021 expressed concerns about vaccinating their children against COVID-19 [@doi:10.1177/00333549221114346].
Indeed, vaccine hesitancy has been reported as a significant barrier to vaccine distribution in countries in North and South America, Europe, Asia, and Africa [@doi:10.1002/jmv.28156; @doi:10.1126/sciadv.abm9825; @doi:10.1186/s41256-022-00255-1; @doi:10.1080/20477724.2021.2011580; @doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2021-052432]. 

> Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative political beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns [@doi:10.1177/003335492211143], to highlight a few.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various factors have been associated with increased vaccine hesitancy including access to compelling misinformation via social media [@doi:10.1093/pnasnexus/pgac207; @doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01728-z], religious and conservative political beliefs [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0268926; @doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdab122; @doi:10.1177/1075547020960463; @doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2020.02254], and safety and efficacy concerns [@doi:10.1177/00333549221114346], to highlight a few.
```
